Salesforce Lab Experiment: Picklist Administration
Experiment Name
Picklist Administration in Salesforce
Aim
To create and manage picklists, configure field dependency, use a global value set, and apply a dynamic default value based on day of the week.
Objectives
1.	Create controlling and dependent picklists in the Student object.
2.	Create and consume a Global Value Set.
3.	Apply a formula-driven default value to assign a lab type depending on whether it’s Monday or not.
Theory
•	Picklist: Dropdown field with predefined values for consistent data entry.
•	Restricted Picklist: Only allows the predefined values.
•	Global Value Set: Shared picklist values across multiple fields.
•	Field Dependency: One picklist (controlling) filters values in another (dependent).
•	Formula Default Value: Automatically sets a default based on logic—in this case, the day of the week.
Pre-requisites
•	Salesforce Developer Org / Trailhead Playground
•	Access to Setup and Object Manager
•	Student custom object created
Procedure
Part A: Create Picklists with Field Dependency
1.	Create Controlling Picklist
o	Setup → Object Manager → Student → Fields & Relationships → New.
o	Choose Picklist → Next.
o	Label: Department
o	Enter values (one per line): CSE, ECE, Mechanical, EEE, Civil
o	Check Restrict picklist to the values defined in the value set.
o	Set Field-Level Security (Visible to all profiles).
o	Add to Page Layouts and Save.
o	Create Dependent Field – Subject
o	New Picklist field.
o	Label: Subject
o	Enter values (one per line) for all subjects listed below in the mapping table.
o	Save.
o	Configure Field Dependency
o	Fields & Relationships → Field Dependencies → New.
o	Controlling Field: Department
o	Dependent Field: Subject → Continue.
o	Map values as per the table below.

o	Department vs Subject Mapping
o	Controlling Field<br>(Department)	o	Dependent Picklist Values<br>(Subject)
CSE	Data Structures and Algorithms, Operating Systems, Database Management Systems, Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Cybersecurity, Cloud Computing
ECE	Analog Circuits, Digital Circuits, Signals and Systems, Communication Systems, Control Systems, Electromagnetic Theory, VLSI Design, Embedded Systems
o	Mechanical	Thermodynamics, Fluid Mechanics, Mechanics of Materials, Materials Science, Machine Design
o	Civil	Structural Engineering, Geotechnical Engineering, Transportation Engineering, Environmental Engineering, Water Resources Engineering, Construction Management, Surveying
o	EEE	Power Systems, Power Electronics, Control Systems, Electrical Machines, Digital Electronics

o	Part B: Create Country–State Field Dependency Using Global Value Set
o	Create Global Value Set – Countries
o	Setup → Quick Find → Picklist Value Sets → New.
o	Label: Countries
o	Values: India, USA, China, Australia, Sri Lanka
o	Save.
o	Create Country Picklist in Student
o	Object Manager → Student → Fields & Relationships → New.
o	Picklist → Next.
o	Label: Country
o	Select Use global value set → Choose Countries.
o	Save.
o	Create State Picklist in Student
o	Object Manager → Student → Fields & Relationships → New.
o	Picklist → Next.
o	Label: State
o	Enter all state/province values from the mapping table below.
o	Save.
o	Configure Country–State Dependency
o	Fields & Relationships → Field Dependencies → New.
o	Controlling Field: Country
o	Dependent Field: State → Continue.
o	Map values as per the table below.
o	Country vs State Mapping
Controlling Field(Country)	Dependent Picklist Values(State)
India	Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh
USA	California, Texas, Florida, New York, Pennsylvania
China	Taiwan, Anhui, Fujian, Gansu, Hebei
Australia	New South Wales (NSW), Victoria (VIC), Queensland (QLD)
Sri Lanka	Central Province, Eastern Province, North Central Province, Northern Province, North Western Province

Part C: Apply Formula for Lab Assignment Default Value
o	Create new Picklist in Student:
o	Label: Lab Assignment
o	Values: Salesforce Lab, Flutter Lab
o	Save.
o	Edit the Lab Assignment field:
o	Under Default Value, select Formula.
o	Enter:
IF(
    WEEKDAY(TODAY()) = 2,
    "Salesforce Lab",
    "Flutter Lab"
)
Check Syntax → Save.
o	Observations
o	Subject list changes dynamically based on the chosen Department.
o	State list changes dynamically based on the chosen Country.
o	Lab Assignment defaults to Salesforce Lab on Mondays, Flutter Lab on other days.
o	Result
o	Created two field dependencies: Department–Subject and Country–State.
o	Used a Global Value Set for Country values.
o	Applied a day-of-week-based formula to auto-select the lab type.


